# OMGX Web Wallet, Related Smart Contracts, and Integration Tests

- [OMGX Web Wallet, Related Smart Contracts, and Integration Tests](#omgx-web-wallet--related-smart-contracts--and-integration-tests)
  * [1. Basic Setup and Configuration](#1-basic-setup-and-configuration)
    + [1.1 Using Rinkeby Testnet](#11-using-rinkeby-testnet)
    + [1.2 Using Local Testnet](#12-using-local-testnet)
  * [2. Running the Integration Tests](#2-running-the-integration-tests)
  * [3. Wallet Specific Smart Contracts](#3-wallet-specific-smart-contracts)
    + [3.1 L1liquidityPool.sol](#31-l1liquiditypoolsol)
      - [Known Gaps/Problems](#known-gaps-problems)
      - [Initial values](#initial-values)
      - [Events](#events)
      - [Functions](#functions)
    + [3.2 L2liquidityPool.sol](#32-l2liquiditypoolsol)
    + [3.3 Deploy Liquidity Pools](#33-deploy-liquidity-pools)
    + [3.4 AtomicSwap](#34-atomicswap)
      - [Functions](#functions-1)
    + [3.5 ERC721Mock aka NFTs](#35-erc721mock-aka-nfts)
  * [4. Running the Web Wallet](#4-running-the-web-wallet)
    + [.ENV Settings](#env-settings)
    + [MetaMask Settings](#metamask-settings)
    + [Wallet Use and Supported Functions](#wallet-use-and-supported-functions)

## 1. Basic Setup and Configuration

Create a `.env` file in the root directory of this project. Add environment-specific variables on new lines in the form of `NAME=VALUE`. Examples are given in the `.env.example` file. Just pick which net you want to work on and copy either the "Rinkeby" _or_ the "Local" envs to your `.env`.

### 1.1 Using Rinkeby Testnet

The stable general purpose testnet is on Rinkeby (ChainID 4) and AWS. To test on Rinkeby, you will need an Infura key and two accounts with Rinkeby ETH in them. The test wallets must contain enough ETH to cover the tests. The `.env` parameters are

```bash

NODE_ENV=local
L1_NODE_WEB3_URL=https://rinkeby.infura.io/v3/YOUR_INFURA_KEY_HERE
L2_NODE_WEB3_URL=http://3.85.224.26:8545
ETH1_ADDRESS_RESOLVER_ADDRESS=0xa32cf2433ba24595d3aCE5cc9A7079d3f1CC5E0c
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_1=0xPRIVATE KEY OF THE FIRST TEST WALLET
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_2=0xPRIVATE KEY OF THE SECOND TEST WALLET
TARGET_GAS_LIMIT=9000000000
CHAIN_ID=28

```

### 1.2 Using Local Testnet

If would like to change the wallet-associated smart contracts and/or work on other aspects of the system, you should run a local development system. You can do this by

```bash

$ git clone git@github.com:enyalabs/optimism-integration.git
$ cd optimism-integration
$ docker-compose pull
$ yarn install
$ ./up_local.sh

```

As the system boots, you'll see several things in the terminal that you will need to correctly configure your `.env`, namely the values for the

```bash

ETH1_ADDRESS_RESOLVER_ADDRESS=0x______
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_1=0x_____
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_2=0x_____

```

For the test private keys, we normally use the ones generated by hardhat as it sets up the local L1. Each of those is funded with 1000 ETH. You can get the test private keys from the hardhat (`l1_chain`) Docker terminal or from your main terminal. You will also need the `ADDRESS_RESOLVER_ADDRESS`, which will zip by as your local system deploys (see the `deployer` Docker terminal output or your main terminal window). Your `.env` should look something like this

```bash

NODE_ENV=local
L1_NODE_WEB3_URL=http://localhost:9545
L2_NODE_WEB3_URL=http://localhost:8545
ETH1_ADDRESS_RESOLVER_ADDRESS=0x3e4CFaa8730092552d9425575E49bB542e329981
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_1=0x754fde3f5e60ef2c7649061e06957c29017fe21032a8017132c0078e37f6193a
TEST_PRIVATE_KEY_2=0x23d9aeeaa08ab710a57972eb56fc711d9ab13afdecc92c89586e0150bfa380a6
TARGET_GAS_LIMIT=9000000000
CHAIN_ID=28

```

## 2. Running the Integration Tests

Note that the integration tests also set up parts of the system that the web wallet will need to work, such as liquidity pools and bridge contracts. 

```bash

$ yarn install
$ yarn build  #builds the contracts
$ yarn deploy #if needed - this will test and deploy the contracts, and write their addresses to /deployments/addresses.json
              #you do not need to deploy onto Rinkeby (unless you really want to) since all the needed contracts are already #deployed and tested

```

The information generated during the deploy (e.g the `/deployment/local/addresses.json`) is used by the web wallet to set things up correctly. **The full test suite includes some very slow transactions such as withdrawals, which can take 100 seconds to complete. Please be patient.**

## 3. Wallet Specific Smart Contracts

These contracts instantiate a simple swap on/off system for fast entry/exit, as well as some basics such as support for atomic swaps.

### 3.1 L1liquidityPool.sol

The Layer 1 liquidity pool accepts ERC20 and ETH. `L1liquidityPool.sol` charges a convenience fee to the user for quickly getting on to the L2.

**L1->L2**: When users **deposit into this contract**, then (1) the pool size grows and (2) corresponding funds are sent to them on the L2 side.  

**L2->L1**: When users **deposit into the corresponding L2 contract**, then (1) the pool size shrinks and (2) corresponding tokens are sent to them at their L1 wallet (minus the fee). 

#### Known Gaps/Problems

- [ ] The contract owner can't currently get funds back out of the liquidy pool. This is a bug/feature, depending.
- [ ] Need system to allow _others_ to add liquidity and pay them for their liquidity.

#### Initial values

* _l2LiquidityPoolAddress_. The address of the Layer 2 liquidity pool 
* _l1messenger_. The address of the Layer 1 messenger  
* _l2ETHAddress_. The address of the oWETH contract on the L2 
* _fee_. The convenience fee. The data type of `_fee` is `uint256`. If the fee is 3%, then `_fee` is 3.

#### Events

* `ownerAddERC20Liquidity_EVENT`. The contract owner just added funds to the liquidity pool.
* `clientDepositL1_EVENT`. A user just deposited tokens to the pool. `clientDepositL1` sends a message to L2, which triggers an L2 contract to send funds to the user's L2 wallet.
* `clientPayL1_EVENT`. A user deposited tokens into the system on the L2 side, which then called `clientPayL1` to send the tokens to the user's L1 account. `clientPayL1` can only be accessed by a contract on the L2 side.
* `ownerRecoverFee_EVENT`. The contract owner just withdrew fees.

#### Functions

* `init`. Can only be accessed by the contract owner. The owner can update the `_fee`.
* `receive`. This handles ETH. If called by the contract owner, it allows ETH to be deposited into the ETH pool. For other callers, it also sends a message to the `L2liquidityPool` smart contract on L2, which then sends oWETH to the sender.
* `ownerAddERC20Liquidity`. Used by the owner to provide liquidity into an ERC20 pool. Unlike a normal deposit, it doesn't send a message to L2.
* ` balanceOf` returns the balance of ERC20 or ETH of this contract. The default address of ETH is `address(0)`.
* ` feeBalanceOf` returns the fee balance of ERC20 or ETH of this contract.
* ` clientDepositL1` Users call this function to deposit tokens. After receiving the deposit, the contract sends a cross-domain message to L2. The `L2liquidityPool` sends the corresponding tokens to the user.
* ` clientPayL1` This cross-chain function can only be accessed `onlyFromCrossDomainAccount`. It can't be accessed by any users. When the layer 2 liquidity pool receives tokens and sends a message to L1, `clientPayL1` sends the token to the user and charges a convenience fee.
* ` ownerRecoverFee` can only be accessed by the contract owner. The contract owner can withdraw fees as they accumulate.

### 3.2 L2liquidityPool.sol

Just like the contract for L1, but with changes e.g. to deal with the fact that the L2 does not have native ETH.

### 3.3 Deploy Liquidity Pools

If you are working on a local testnet, please deploy **L2LiquidityPool.sol** first, then use the address of **L2LiquidityPool** as the parameter for deploying the **L1Liquidity**. See **/test/a_setup.spec.ts** to see the whole process.

```javascript

L2LiquidityPool = await Factory__L2LiquidityPool.deploy(
  env.watcher.l2.messengerAddress,
)
await L2LiquidityPool.deployTransaction.wait()

L1LiquidityPool = await Factory__L1LiquidityPool.deploy(
  L2LiquidityPool.address,
  env.watcher.l1.messengerAddress,
  env.L2ETHGateway.address,
  3 //this is the 3% fee
)
await L1LiquidityPool.deployTransaction.wait()

const L2LiquidityPoolTX = await L2LiquidityPool.init(L1LiquidityPool.address, "3")
await L2LiquidityPoolTX.wait()
console.log(' L2 LP initialized:',L2LiquidityPoolTX.hash);

```

### 3.4 AtomicSwap

Used to swap ERC20 tokens.

#### Functions

* `open` creates **Swap** struct, which contains the information of the buyer and sender.
* `close` closes the swap. It swaps the ERC20 tokens of the sender and the buyer.
* `expire` sets the status of the swap to be **EXPIRED**.
* `check` returns the **Swap** construct.

### 3.5 ERC721Mock aka NFTs

This contract sets up a very rudimentary interface to the @OpenZeppelin ERC721 contracts. Used to set up a very basic NFT system where the owner can mint NFTs and send them to others, who can then see their NFTs. Have a look at Alice's NFTs.

## 4. Running the Web Wallet

The web wallet is a react front end that makes it easy to see your balances, transfer funds, and build on for your own uses. The code is deliberately basic, to make it easy for you to repurpose it for your own needs. It's a work in progress - for example, we are adding some basic support for NFTs and and an interface for people to contribute to the conjoined liquidity pools that live on the L1 and L2. 

```bash

$ cd /wallet 
$ yarn install
$ yarn start

```

### .ENV Settings

Create a `.env` in `/wallets` and provide your Infura and Etherscan keys:

```bash

REACT_APP_INFURA_ID=
REACT_APP_ETHERSCAN_API=

```

At that point, the wallet will start when you run `$ yarn start`. You can interact with the wallet at `http://localhost:3000.`

### MetaMask Settings

On the MetaMask side, some set up is needed.

1. Add your two test accounts to MetaMask (through **MetaMask>Import Account**). In the test code, PK_1 is the `Bob` account, and PK_2 is the `Alice`  account. 

2. You also need to point Metamask at the correct chain. 
  * For work on Rinkeby L1, chose **MetaMask>Networks>Rinkeby Test Network**.
  * For work on the OMGX Rinkeby L2, chose **MetaMask>Networks>Custom RPC** and enter `http://3.85.224.26:8545` with a ChainID of 28.
  * For work on a local L1, chose **MetaMask>Networks>Custom RPC** and enter `http://localhost:9545` with a ChainID of 31337.
  * For work on a local OMGX L2, chose **MetaMask>Networks>Custom RPC** and enter `http://localhost:8545` with a ChainID of 28.

*NOTE* You might have to reset MetaMask when you re-start the local network. The reset button is in **MetaMask>Settings>Advanced>Reset Account**.

### Wallet Use and Supported Functions

1. Open the MetaMask browser extension and select the chain you want to work on.

2. On the top right of the wallet landing page, select either `local` or `rinkeby`. You will then be taken to your account page. Here you can see your balances and move tokens from L1 to L2, and back, for example.

